#summary Capture background on the subject of denotation

== Reading ==
 * http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Descriptive_theory_of_names
 * http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sense_and_reference
 * http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_re
 * http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-intensional/
 * http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/frege/
 * http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/goodman-aesthetics/

== Probes ==

Various ways in which denotation and related relations are teased apart.

Compare:
 * "Barack Obama"
 * "The president of the United State on July 20, 2009"
The _referent_, or entity _designated_ by these two information entities is the same.  In what ways are the two entities and their relationship to Barack Obama (the person) different?

--

What is the relationship between "1 + 2" and 3. 

-- 

Eric Arthur Blair is George Orwell

"Eric Arthur Blair" and "George Orwell" refer to the same individual. If their total meaning was what they refer to then the sentence above wouldn't have any content. If you think it does (and people think it does), then there's something more to these names then just what they refer to.

--

http://ismir2001.ismir.net/pdf/smiraglia.pdf describes Pierce's distinctions:
a) likenesses, which convey ideas of the things they 
represent through imitation; b) indications, which show 
something about things by being physically connected with them; 
and c) symbols, or general signs, which have become associated 
with their meanings by usage.  

--

Simon's Parts (http://books.google.com/books?id=vX7t7n9Mk_wC) uses the term _designation_ when discussing the relation of symbols to entities, specifically in the area of mereology. Further distinguished are singular versus plural designation.