#summary Meeting notes November 10th 2009

= IAO Meeting notes of November 10th 2009 =

== Details ==

 * Convened by: Melanie, Alan 
 * Notes by: Melanie, Alan
 * Where: Skype
 * Attendees: James, Bjoern, Michel, William
 * Regrets: Larry, Adam


== Agenda ==
- identifier: postponed until Jonathan joins

- remove "specifically and materially denotes"
1. http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=20&q=denote
2. http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=25&q=denote

== Minutes ==

Bjoern:
There was agreement to remove 'specifically denotes', and instead use
'denotes' only, which will have the meaning that 'generically denotes' has now. 
Can we go ahead and implement?

MC: difference denotes/about?
word boston on sign denotes boston
sentence "I was in boston" is about boston
"alan is a nice name" -> is_about
"I met alan yesterday" -> denotes (we refer specifically to somebody)

=> denotes is less general than is_about (it is a subproperty of is_about)

from http://www.thefreedictionary.com/denotes
3. To signify directly; refer to specifically. seems adequate for us.

We use denote in its logical sense: 
from http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-mt/:
Model theory tries to be metaphysically and ontologically neutral. It is typically couched in the language of set theory simply because that is the normal language of mathematics - for example, this semantics assumes that names denote things in a set IR called the 'universe' - but the use of set-theoretic language here is not supposed to imply that the things in the universe are set-theoretic in nature. Model theory is usually most relevant to implementation via the notion of entailment, described later, which makes it possible to define valid inference rules.

It is an instance relationship.


Some examples and counter examples:
- "boston - 50 miles" denotes Boston ("consistent" association) but doesn't denote the distance to boston
- red flare denotes danger: while valid english, this is not a valid use of denote in our case
- the symbol "pi" denotes 3.14159......


== Action items == 

AR to update the file accordingly