#summary Meeting notes November 3rd 2009

= IAO Meeting notes of November 3rd 2009 =

== Details ==

 * Convened by: Melanie, Alan 
 * Notes by: Melanie
 * Where: Skype
 * Attendees: Larry, Michel, Philippe, William
 * Regrets: Alan, Bjoern


== Agenda ==
- http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=64 - measurement datum 

- http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=62 - update "eternalDerived" file 

- http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=65
  - _identifier 

== Minutes ==

- http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=64
 - measurement datum 
definition needs to be updated 
AI for AR - DL Nov 4th 

- http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=62
  - update "eternalDerived" file 
AI for MC - DL Nov 4th 

- http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=65 - identifier 

We had a discussion on how to define _identifier, label and symbol. 

The result summarized: 
- symbol: denotes something. cannot be decomposed into parts that   
denote the same thing. Examples: letters, words, chinese characters. 
- identifier: a symbol that denotes something and is created with the   
intend to pick out that something from a larger set. Example: Lot   
number, SSN, Pubmed ID 
- label: a symbol or textual entity that describes an entity 

Some points of the discussion: 
- identifiers should be linked to their objective: identifier would be   
a defined class 
- symbols are unitary information artifact: they cannot be decomposed   
into parts denoting the same than the symbol as a whole 
- a label doesn't have to be unitary, it can be decomposed. A label is   
descriptive, and is not always meant to identify something. 

== Action items == 

All: continue discussion. Check with Jonathan for feedback.