#summary Working session at ICBO 21011

= Introduction =

A working session on IAO is organized on Friday July 29th, 3.30-4.30pm during the ICBO conference. 

See announcement [http://ncorwiki.buffalo.edu/index.php/ICBO_Conference_Logistics here]


= Agenda =

 * OBO to OWL conversion annotation properties
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=90 tracker 90], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=92 tracker 92], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=93 tracker 93], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=100  tracker 100], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=103  tracker 103], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=104 tracker 104], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=105  tracker 105], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=106 tracker 106], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=107  tracker 107], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=110 tracker 110], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=111 tracker 111].

 * textual entity/document/document part overlap
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=33 tracker 33], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=85 tracker 85], 
 [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=42  tracker 42].

 * plan specification documentation
[http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/issues/detail?id=112 tracker 112] _Mathias Brochhausen_<br>
see this [http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/wiki/DirectiveInformationEntity wiki page]

 * Names, parts of names, and whether it's worth differentiating names on
the basis of the type of entity the name refers to (person, physical
location where mail is delivered, physical location where someone
lives, building, software application, instance of software
application) _Bill Hogan_

= Minutes = 

*1. question of what is an IAO release*
	- addition of curation statuses + announce of deprecation + sent around for review IAO-core

*2. plan specification* 

Every plan is a concretization of its plan specification
A plan can form the basis of an intentional action

Many protocols are plan specification that never become plan. 
example: any grant XX writes -> he never intends on doing what he says


DIE (directive information entity)
	is_about plan : not sufficient: many entities are about plan but are not DIE e.g., "this plan is in the corner of the room"

model: clinical study design written down somewhere (MB). Study design is subtype of plan specification which needs to be concretized but will never happen on piece of paper

=> proposal: has to be concretized as plan or sthg else.  Only plan specification (no other information artifact) can be concretized as a plan
import plan from OBI

*3. OBO2OWL annotation properties*

=> mapping problem with IAO, large community of OBO users

Barry: will define what is a synonym in an ontology

== Mapping OBO 'synonyms' to IAO (Notes by David OS) ==

Discussion of these started in the meeting but continued among a smaller group afterwards.

In discussion after the session 'approximate synonym' seemed to have general agreement as the label to use (although we'll see if that holds...).  I think that means we keep synonym for cases of exactly the same meaning. I'm sure others will yell if they disagree.

 The agreement on definitions was, I believe, pretty close to the more formal definitions I suggested before the meeting (e.g.- here). The main issue we discussed was defining what counts as broader or narrower referents.  This makes sense for things with spatial and temporal boundaries.  Perhaps not for things that without them.  I've had a go at taking this into account here.

* Note - I've started all the defs here with 'A word or phrase that...' Barry suggested: "A noun or noun phrase that..."  I'd be happy to go with that if others are.

=>

name: synonym
def: "A word or phrase that*, within some paper of community, has exactly the same set of referents as this ontology term."
maps to OBO:synonym + scope 'EXACT'

name: approximate synonym^
def: "A word or phrase that*, within some paper or community, has nearly the same set of referents as this ontology term, or has a set of referents whose members are very similar to the referents of this ontology term."
comment: Examples of very similar referents: 2 anatomical structures with minor differences in their boundaries; 2 occurrents with minor differences in their temporal boundaries.  Two nearly indistinguishable shades of off-white (?)
maps to OBO:synonym + scope 'RELATED'

name: broad approximate synonym
def: "A word or phrase that*, within some paper or community, has a slightly broader set of referents than this ontology term, or has a set of referents whose members have slightly broader spatial or temporal boundaries to the referents of this ontology term."
comment: Note, as independent continuants do not have spatial or temporal boundaries, use approximate synonym instead for these cases.
SubAnnotationPropertyOf: approximate synonym
maps to OBO:synonym + scope 'broad'

name: narrow approximate synonym
def: "A word or phrase that*, within some paper or community has a slightly broader set of referents than this ontology term, or has a set of referents whose members have slightly narrower spatial or temporal boundaries to the referents of this ontology term."
comment: Note, as independent continuants do not have spatial or temporal boundaries, use approximate synonym instead for these cases.
SubAnnotationPropertyOf: approximate synonym
maps to OBO:synonym + scope 'broad'


For the record, here are various suggested labels shouted out during the session. [Square bracket contain my comments]

search term [carries no connotation of closeness of meaning]
entry term [may be good precedent for this from its use in libraries]
closely related term
interface term [perhaps misleading - given the various uses of OBO 'synonyms']
ontologically similar to  [Don't like this as it confuses language and ontology]
close match/exact match
alias [Sounds like (exact) synonym to me]

[General note, I'm not keen on 'term' as it is used so much in the ontology world to refer to the human-readable identifiers of classes in ontologies.  I want to keep a distinction between these and words in language.]




                     

= Attendees =
(in alphabetical order)
 * Tomasz Adamusiak
 * Matthias Brochhausen
 * Melanie Courtot
 * Bill Duncan
 * Kerstin Forsberg
 * Bill Hogan
 * Lawrence Hunter
 * James Malone
 * Chris Mungall
 * David Osumi-Sutherland
 * Bjoern Peters
 * Alan Ruttenberg
 * Satya Sahoo
 * Barry Smith
 * Jie Zheng